---
title: "LandR _Biomass_speciesParameters_ Manual"
subtitle: "v.0.0.1"
date: "Last updated: 2022-03-18"
output:
  bookdown::html_document2:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    theme: sandstone
    number_sections: false
    df_print: paged
    keep_md: yes
editor_options:
  chunk_output_type: console
  markdown: 
    wrap: 80
bibliography: citations/references_Biomass_speciesParameters.bib
citation-style: citations/ecology-letters.csl
link-citations: true
always_allow_html: true
---

# LandR *Biomass_speciesParameters* Module

<!-- the following are text references used in captions for LaTeX compatibility -->

(ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) *Biomass_speciesParameters*





[![made-with-Markdown](figures/markdownBadge.png)](http://commonmark.org)
[![Generic
badge](figures/genericBadge.png)](https://github.com/PredictiveEcology/Biomass_speciesParameters/issues)

<!-- if knitting to pdf remember to add the pandoc_args: ["--extract-media", "."] option to yml in order to get the badge images -->

**This documentation is work in progress. Potential discrepancies and omissions
may exist for the time being. If you find any, do contact us using the link
above\^\^**

#### Authors:

Ian Eddy <ian.eddy@example.com> [aut, cre]
<!-- ideally separate authors with new lines, '\n' not working -->

## Module Overview

### Module summary

This module attempts to calibrate species growth and mortality trait values used
in *Biomass_core*, by matching theoretical species' growth curves obtained with
different trait values (generated by LandR `Biomass_speciesFactorial`; see
[Simulated species data]) against observed growth curves derived from Permanent
Sample Plots (PSP data) across Canada (see [Permanent sample plot data]), to
find the combination of traits that allows a better match to the observed
curves. In particular, it calibrates the `growthcurve`, `mortalityshape`,
`maxANPP` and `maxB` traits (see [Parameter estimation/calibration]).

This module **will not** prepare other traits or parameters used in
*Biomass_core* and so it is meant to be used in conjunction with another data
module which does so (e.g. *Biomass_borealDataPrep*). However, it may be used
stand-alone in an initial phase for easier inspection of the statistical
calibration procedure.

**Note that a Google Account is necessary to access the data.**

As of 2022-03-18, the PSP data needed for this module is not freely
available, and data sharing agreements must be obtained from the governments of
SK, AB, and BC.

### Module inputs and parameters at a glance

*Biomass_speciesParameters* requires an internet connection and authorized
access to the default data used for the calibration (e.g., theoretical species
growth curves and PSD data).

We advise future users to run *Biomass_speciesParameters* with defaults and
inspect what the objects are like before supplying their own data or trying to
run *Biomass_speciesFactorial* to generate their own theoretical curves.

Below are the full lists of input objects (Table
\@ref(tab:moduleInputs-Biomass-speciesParameters)) and parameters (Table
\@ref(tab:moduleParams-Biomass-speciesParameters)) that
*Biomass_speciesParameters* expects. The only inputs that **must** be provided
(i.e., *Biomass_speciesParameters* does not have a default for) is
`studyAreaANPP` (the study area used extract the PSP data from). All other input
objects and parameters have internal defaults, but the user may need to request
access to their online files (see Tables
\@ref(tab:moduleInputs2-Biomass-speciesParameters) and
\@ref(tab:moduleParams2-Biomass-speciesParameters)).

<table class="table" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<caption>(\#tab:moduleInputs-Biomass-speciesParameters)List of (ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) input objects and their description.</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> objectName </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> desc </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> factorialSpeciesTable </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table with species traits for matching to `reducedFactorialCohortData` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> reducedFactorialCohortData </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> results of factorial species trait simulation. This can be found by running `SpeciesFactorial.R` but requires a specific commit of Biomass_core </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPmeasure </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> merged PSP and TSP individual tree measurements. Must include the following columns: MeasureID, OrigPlotID1, MeasureYear, TreeNumber, Species, DBH and newSpeciesName the latter corresponding to species names in `LandR::sppEquivalencies_CA$PSP`. Defaults to randomized PSP data stripped of real plotIDs </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPplot </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> merged PSP and TSP plot data. Defaults to randomized PSP data stripped of real plotIDs. Must contain fields 'MeasureID', 'MeasureYear', 'OrigPlotID1', and 'baseSA' the latter being stand age at year of first measurement </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPgis </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Plot location sf object. Defaults to PSP data stripped of real plotIDs/location. Must include field 'OrigPlotID1' for joining to PSPplot object </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> species </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> a table of invariant species traits with the following trait colums: 'species', 'Area', 'longevity', 'sexualmature', 'shadetolerance', 'firetolerance', 'seeddistance_eff', 'seeddistance_max', 'resproutprob', 'mortalityshape', 'growthcurve', 'resproutage_min', 'resproutage_max', 'postfireregen', 'wooddecayrate', 'leaflongevity' 'leafLignin', 'hardsoft'. Only 'growthcurve' and 'mortalityshape' are used in this module. Default is from Dominic Cyr and Yan Boulanger's project </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> speciesEcoregion </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table of spatially-varying species traits (`maxB`, `maxANPP`, `establishprob`), defined by species and `ecoregionGroup`) Defaults to a dummy table based on dummy data os biomass, age, ecoregion and land cover class </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> sppEquiv </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table of species equivalencies. See `?LandR::sppEquivalencies_CA`. </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> studyAreaANPP </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> study area used to crop PSP data before building growth curves </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table class="table" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<caption>(\#tab:moduleParams-Biomass-speciesParameters)List of (ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) parameters and their description.</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> paramName </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> paramDesc </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .plotInitialTime </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time at which the first plot event should occur </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .plotInterval </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time interval between plot events </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .saveInitialTime </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time at which the first save event should occur </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .saveInterval </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time interval between save events </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .useCache </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Should this entire module be run with caching activated? This is generally intended for data-type modules, where stochasticity and time are not relevant </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> biomassModel </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The model used to calculate biomass from DBH. Can be either 'Lambert2005' or 'Ung2008' </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainGrowthCurve </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on range of potential growth curves when fitting traits. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that traits are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainMortalityShape </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on mortality shape when fitting traits. low mortality curve needs to excessive cohorts with very little biomass as longevity is approached, adding computation strain. alternatively accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainMaxANPP </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on `maxANPP` when fitting traits. cohorts are initiated with `B = maxANPP` which may be unreasonably high if `maxANPP` is also high. Both `maxANPP` and growthcurve params control when `maxB` is reached. High `maxANPP` results in earlier peaks alternatively accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> GAMMiterations </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> number of iterations for GAMMs. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that GAMMS are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> GAMMknots </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> the number of knots to use in the GAMM. Either 3 or 4 is recommended. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that GAMMS are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimumPlotsPerGamm </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimum number of PSP plots before building GAMM </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minDBH </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimum diameter at breast height (DBH) in cm used to filter PSP data. Defaults to 0cm, i.e. all tree measurements are used. </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPperiod </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The years by which to subset sample plot data, if desired. Must be a vector of length 2 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> quantileAgeSubset </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> quantile by which to subset PSP data. As older stands are sparsely represented, the oldest measurements become vastly more influential. This parameter accepts both a single value and a list of vectors named by `sppEquivCol.` The PSP stand ages are found in `sim$speciesGAMMs$SPECIES$originalData`, where SPECIES is the species ID </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> sppEquivCol </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The column in `sim$sppEquiv` data.table to group species by. This parameter should share the same name as in Biomass_borealDataPrep . PSPs are aggregated by names in the PSP column and traits estimated for the corresponding names in the `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> useHeight </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Should height be used to calculate biomass (in addition to DBH). Advise against including height unless you are certain it is present in every PSP </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Events

The following events take place during a *Biomass_speciesParameters* run. Note
that this module only runs once (in one "time step") and only executes one event
(`init`).

-   Module initiation (`init` event): after downloading all the necessary data
    (during the `.inputObjects` event), the module prepares the necessary
    objects and parameters for the simulation and performs the calibration (see
    [Detailed description]).

See [Simulation flow] for further detail.

### Module outputs

The module produces the following outputs (Table
\@ref(tab:moduleOutputs-Biomass-speciesParameters)):

<table class="table" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<caption>(\#tab:moduleOutputs-Biomass-speciesParameters)List of (ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) output objects and their description.</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> objectName </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> desc </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> species </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> a table that has species traits such as longevity... </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> speciesEcoregion </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table of spatially-varying species traits (`maxB`, `maxANPP`, `establishprob`), defined by species and `ecoregionGroup`) Defaults to a dummy table based on dummy data os biomass, age, ecoregion and land cover class </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> speciesGAMMs </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> a list of mixed-effect general additive models (gamm) for each tree species modeling biomass as a function of age </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Links to other modules

Intended to be used with another data module, like *Biomass_borealDataPrep*,
which will prepare all other traits and parameters for *Biomass_core*. You can
see all *potential* module linkages within the LandR ecosystem
[here](https://rpubs.com/PredictiveEcology/LandR_Module_Ecosystem). Select
*Biomass_speciesParameters* from the drop-down menu to see linkages.

### Getting help

-   <https://github.com/PredictiveEcology/Biomass_speciesParameters/issues>

## Module manual

### Detailed description

Tree cohort growth and mortality in *Biomass_core* are essentially determined by
five parameters: `growthcurve`, `mortalityshape`, maximum biomass (`maxB`),
maximum aboveground net primary productivity (`maxANPP`) and `longevity`.

The `growthcurve` and `mortalityshape` parameters (called 'growth curve' and
'mortality shape' in LANDIS-II Biomass Succession Extension v3.2, the base model
for *Biomass_core*) strongly modulate the shape of species growth curves and so
it is important they they are calibrated to the study area in question.

Also, the growth and mortality equations used in *Biomass_core* are non-linear
and their resulting actual biomass accumulation curve is an emergent phenomenon
due to competition effects. This means that the ideal trait/parameter values
cannot be estimated on a single species basis, as their resulting dynamics will
be very different under in a multi-species context.

The *Biomass_speciesParameters* module attempts to address these issues (at
least partially) using a "curve-matching" approach. It compares a GAMM
<!-- this needs to be revised in light of new methods --> fitted to permanent
sample plot (PSP) data to a large collection of theoretical species curves, each
representing a different set of growth and mortality parameters (`growthcurve`
and `mortalityshape`, respectively).

The module generally follows other data modules, like *Biomass_boreaDataPrep*,
as it also attempts to calibrate previously estimated spatially varying species
traits (`maxB` and `maxANPP`).

#### Permanent sample plot data

*Biomass_speciesParameters* can use all the PSP data available (note that it may
span several thousands of kilometres), or select the data based on a shapefile
(`studyAreaANPP`; see [Input objects]).

By default, the PSP data are obtained from the National Forest Inventory (NFI),
the Alberta Ministry of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Ministry of the
Environment, and the British Columbian Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural
Resource Operations, and Rural Development. These data were previously treated
for errors and standardized into a single dataset with the exact location and
identifying attributes anonymized.

The data include individual species and diameter at breast height (DBH)
measurements for each tree in a plot, as well as stand age. As part of the
standardization process, dead trees were removed from the dataset. Tree biomass
was then derived from DBH using the model by @LambertEtAl2005 and summed by
plot. Lastly, the proportional biomass of each species was calculated for every
individual measurement of each plot.

Note that the model used to calculate biomass can be changed to @UngEtAl2008 via
the `P(sim)$biomassModel` module parameter.

#### Simulated species data

<!-- the following need to be revised in light of new methods -->

The default dataset of theoretical species curves (biomass accumulation curves,
to be more precise) was generated by running a simplified *Biomass_core*
simulation with no reproduction, competition, disturbance, dispersal effects, on
a single cohort and a single pixel. Each simulation varied in the combination of
species trait values that influence growth and mortality dynamics, namely:
`growthcurve`, `mortalityshape`, `longevity` and `mANPPproportion`, the ratio of
maximum aboveground net primary productivity (`maxANPP`) to maximum biomass
(`maxBiomass`). `growthcurve` values varied from 0 to 1, in increments of 0.1;
`mortalityshape` varied from 5 to 25, in increments of 1; `longevity` varied
from 150 to 700 in increments of 25; `mANPPproportion` varied from 0.25 to 10 in
increments of 0.25; `maxBiomass` was kept constant at 5000.

This resulted in over 200,000 combinations of parameter values.

Results from these simulations were compiled into a table that is accessed by
*Biomass_speciesParameters*, so that the module can be run without needing to
re-simulate the theoretical curves.

#### Parameter estimation/calibration

*Biomass_speciesParameters* calibrates `growthcurve`, `mortalityshape`, `maxB`
and `maxANPP` by matching the theoretical species curves against observed
species growth curves from permanent sample plot (PSP) data. It does not attempt
to calibrate `longevity`, as we feel this parameter should be obtained from
published sources. `maxB` and `maxANPP` were calibrated using the parameter
`mANPPproportion`, as it reflects the relationship between them.

Before calculating the *observed* species growth curves, the module subsets the
PSP data to stand ages below the 95th percent quantile for all species (this can
be changed via the `P(sim)$quantileAgeSubset` module parameter), as records for
larger age classes were limited and constituted statistical outliers. In some
species, changing the quantile value may improve results, however. Two examples
are *Pinus banksiana* and *Populus sp*, for which using the 99th percent
quantile improved the models, because these are short-lived species for which
data at advanced ages is scarce.

The module attempts to use "pure" stands to estimate parameters, while balancing
sample size (see biomass weighting below). Hence, for a given species, it only
includes plots where the species' relative biomass is at least 50% (e.g. for
*Populus tremuloides*, plots are only included if 50% of the stand biomass is
composed of *P. tremuloides*).

In addition, 50 points are added at the origin (age = 0 and biomass = 0) to
force the intercept to be essentially 0 age and 0 biomass.

Observed growth curves for each species are then modelled using a generalized
additive mixed models (GAMMs) that relate species biomass ($B$) with stand age
($standAge$), accounting for the random effects of the measurement year
($measureYear$) and plot ($plotID$) on the intercept:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
  B \sim f_{1}(standAge) + (\sim 1 | measureYear + plotID)
  (\#eq:GAMM)
\end{equation}
```
where $f_{1}$ denotes the smoother function. To avoid overfitting, the module
constrains the smoother on stand age to a maximum smoothing degree of 3 (i.e. 3
knots and a polynomial degree of 2) and a point constraint at 0 that attempts to
force the intercept to 0, by default. The smoother degree constraint, however,
can be changed via the `P(sim)$GAMMknots` module parameter.

In addition, $B$ is weighted with respect to species dominance. This consisted
in 1) calculating the average biomass of each dominant species (i.e. relative
biomass in a plot \> 0.5; $domSpeciesB_{1}$), in each plot and measurement year,
and 2) dividing the species average biomass by the average biomass across all
*n* dominant species ($allDomSpeciesB$):

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
  \frac{\overline{\rm domSpeciesB_{1}}}{\overline{\rm allDomSpeciesB}}
  (\#eq:Bweights)
\end{equation}
```
For the added 0 age and 0 biomass data the module uses weights equal to 1.

It is possible that some selected species do not have enough data to allow for
model convergence. In this case, *Biomass_speciesParameters* skips parameter
calibration, and parameter values remain unchanged.

After each species GAMM is calculated, *Biomass_speciesParameters* compares it
to the theoretical curves, and picks the best one based on maximum likelihood.
This best theoretical curve will be associated with a given combination of
`growthcurve`, `mortalityshape` and `maxANPPproportion` values, which are then
used directly as the calibrated values, in case of `growthcurve` and
`mortalityshape`, or to calibrate `maxANPP` in the case of `maxANPPproportion`
(see below).

The user has the option to constrain the values of the `growthcurve` and
`mortalityshape` parameters. By default, `growthcurve` is forced to 0.5,
`mortalityshape` is allowed to vary between 15 and 25, and `mANPPproportion`
between 2.0 and 5.0 (see module parameters `P(sim)$constrainGrowthCurve`,
`P(sim)constrainMortalityShape` and `P(sim)constrainMaxANPP`). These boundary
values were based on preliminary runs and analyses using the default data and
may not apply to other datasets, or to different spatial subsets of the default
data.

If boundary values are used, *Biomass_speciesParameters* subsets the theoretical
species growth curves to those with trait values within the selected boundaries.
Similarly, the module selects only the theoretical curves with longevity values
matching those used in the supplied traits table (`species` input object; see
[Input objects])

Since simulated growth curves never achieve the maximum biomass parameter (the
`maxBiomass` parameter set to 5000 for all simulations of theoretical species
curves, or the `maxB` parameter in *Biomass_core* simulations), it acts as an
asymptotic limit that reflects the potential maximum biomass for a species in an
ecolocation (ecological zone and land cover combination),
*Biomass_speciesParameters* uses uses the relationship between the achieved
maximum biomass to the potential maximum biomass (`maxBiomass`), to rescale the
`maxB` values estimated from data using an upstream module (e.g.
*Biomass_borealDataPrep*). This way, species dynamics simulated in
*Biomass_core* are able to achieve the maximum observed biomasses (used to
*initially* estimate `maxB`).

Finally, the module calibrates `maxANPP` using the `mANPPproportion` value from
the best matching theoretical growth curve as:

```{=tex}
\begin{equation}
  maxB \times \frac{mANPPproportion}{100}
  (\#eq:maxANPPcalib)
\end{equation}
```
where `maxB` is already the calibrated version. In cases where there are not
sufficient PSP data to fit the GAMMs and perform the calibration,
`mANPPproportion` defaults to 3.33, which corresponds to the value used in
LANDIS-II applications in Canada's boreal forests. As already stated above, the
final `maxANPP` value is constrained between 2.0 and 5.0 by default.

### Initialization, inputs and parameters

*Biomass_speciesParameters* initializes itself and prepares all inputs provided
there is an active internet connection and the user has access to the data (and
a Google Account to do so)

#### Input objects

Table \@ref(tab:moduleInputs2-Biomass-speciesParameters) shows the full list of
input objects used by the module.

<table class="table" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<caption>(\#tab:moduleInputs2-Biomass-speciesParameters)List of (ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) input objects and their description.</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> objectName </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> objectClass </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> desc </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> sourceURL </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> factorialSpeciesTable </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table with species traits for matching to `reducedFactorialCohortData` </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://drive.google.com/open?id=1q0ou0CBzD9GqGSparpHqf318IWK6ycty </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> reducedFactorialCohortData </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> results of factorial species trait simulation. This can be found by running `SpeciesFactorial.R` but requires a specific commit of Biomass_core </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://drive.google.com/open?id=1h8StXE0vm8xyDycRomCkwIaL7wfh5Irj </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPmeasure </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> merged PSP and TSP individual tree measurements. Must include the following columns: MeasureID, OrigPlotID1, MeasureYear, TreeNumber, Species, DBH and newSpeciesName the latter corresponding to species names in `LandR::sppEquivalencies_CA$PSP`. Defaults to randomized PSP data stripped of real plotIDs </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LmOaEtCZ6EBeIlAm6ttfLqBqQnQu4Ca7/view?usp=sharing </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPplot </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> merged PSP and TSP plot data. Defaults to randomized PSP data stripped of real plotIDs. Must contain fields 'MeasureID', 'MeasureYear', 'OrigPlotID1', and 'baseSA' the latter being stand age at year of first measurement </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LmOaEtCZ6EBeIlAm6ttfLqBqQnQu4Ca7/view?usp=sharing </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPgis </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> sf </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Plot location sf object. Defaults to PSP data stripped of real plotIDs/location. Must include field 'OrigPlotID1' for joining to PSPplot object </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://drive.google.com/file/d/1LmOaEtCZ6EBeIlAm6ttfLqBqQnQu4Ca7/view?usp=sharing </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> species </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> a table of invariant species traits with the following trait colums: 'species', 'Area', 'longevity', 'sexualmature', 'shadetolerance', 'firetolerance', 'seeddistance_eff', 'seeddistance_max', 'resproutprob', 'mortalityshape', 'growthcurve', 'resproutage_min', 'resproutage_max', 'postfireregen', 'wooddecayrate', 'leaflongevity' 'leafLignin', 'hardsoft'. Only 'growthcurve' and 'mortalityshape' are used in this module. Default is from Dominic Cyr and Yan Boulanger's project </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dcyr/LANDIS-II_IA_generalUseFiles/master/speciesTraits.csv </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> speciesEcoregion </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table of spatially-varying species traits (`maxB`, `maxANPP`, `establishprob`), defined by species and `ecoregionGroup`) Defaults to a dummy table based on dummy data os biomass, age, ecoregion and land cover class </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> sppEquiv </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> data.table </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> table of species equivalencies. See `?LandR::sppEquivalencies_CA`. </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> studyAreaANPP </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> SpatialPolygonsDataFrame </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> study area used to crop PSP data before building growth curves </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Of these inputs, the following are particularly important and deserve special
attention:

-   **Spatial layers**

    -   `studyAreaANPP` -- shapefile. A `SpatialPolygonsDataFrame` with a single
        polygon determining the where the PSP should be subset to simulation
        will take place. This input object **must be supplied by the user**.

-   **Tables**

    -   `factorialSpeciesTable` and `reducedFactorialCohortData` -- a tables of
        species trait combinations and the theoretical species grwoth curve data
        (respectively)
    -   `PSPmeasure`, `PSPplot` and `PSPgis` -- tree measurement, biomass growth
        and geographical data of the PSP datasets used to buildi observed
        species growth curves.
    -   `species` -- a table of invariant species traits that may have been
        produced by another module. It **must** contain the columns 'species',
        'growthcurve' and 'mortality shape', whose values will be calibrated.
    -   `speciesEcoregion` -- table of spatially-varying species traits that may
        have been produced by another module. It **must** contain the columns
        'speciesCode', 'maxB' and 'maxANPP' and 'ecoregionGroup' (the
        ecolocation ID). 'maxB' and 'maxANPP' values will be calibrated by
        species.

#### Parameters

Table \@ref(tab:moduleParams2-Biomass-speciesParameters) lists all parameters
used in *Biomass_speciesParameters* and their detailed information.

<table class="table" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto;">
<caption>(\#tab:moduleParams2-Biomass-speciesParameters)List of (ref:Biomass-speciesParameters) parameters and their description.</caption>
 <thead>
  <tr>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> paramName </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> paramClass </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> default </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> min </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> max </th>
   <th style="text-align:left;"> paramDesc </th>
  </tr>
 </thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .plotInitialTime </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time at which the first plot event should occur </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .plotInterval </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time interval between plot events </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .saveInitialTime </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time at which the first save event should occur </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .saveInterval </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> This describes the simulation time interval between save events </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> .useCache </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> logical </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> FALSE </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Should this entire module be run with caching activated? This is generally intended for data-type modules, where stochasticity and time are not relevant </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> biomassModel </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> character </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Lambert2005 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The model used to calculate biomass from DBH. Can be either 'Lambert2005' or 'Ung2008' </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainGrowthCurve </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 0.5, 0.5 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 0 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 1 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on range of potential growth curves when fitting traits. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that traits are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainMortalityShape </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 15, 25 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 5 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 25 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on mortality shape when fitting traits. low mortality curve needs to excessive cohorts with very little biomass as longevity is approached, adding computation strain. alternatively accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> constrainMaxANPP </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 2, 5 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 1 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 10 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> upper and lower bounds on `maxANPP` when fitting traits. cohorts are initiated with `B = maxANPP` which may be unreasonably high if `maxANPP` is also high. Both `maxANPP` and growthcurve params control when `maxB` is reached. High `maxANPP` results in earlier peaks alternatively accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> GAMMiterations </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 8 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 1 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> number of iterations for GAMMs. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that GAMMS are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> GAMMknots </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 3 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> the number of knots to use in the GAMM. Either 3 or 4 is recommended. This module accepts a list of vectors, with names equal to `sppEquivCol`, so that GAMMS are customizable </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimumPlotsPerGamm </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 50 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 10 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimum number of PSP plots before building GAMM </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minDBH </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> integer </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 0 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 0 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> minimum diameter at breast height (DBH) in cm used to filter PSP data. Defaults to 0cm, i.e. all tree measurements are used. </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> PSPperiod </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 1920, 2019 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The years by which to subset sample plot data, if desired. Must be a vector of length 2 </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> quantileAgeSubset </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> numeric </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 95 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 1 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> 100 </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> quantile by which to subset PSP data. As older stands are sparsely represented, the oldest measurements become vastly more influential. This parameter accepts both a single value and a list of vectors named by `sppEquivCol.` The PSP stand ages are found in `sim$speciesGAMMs$SPECIES$originalData`, where SPECIES is the species ID </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> sppEquivCol </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> character </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> default </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> The column in `sim$sppEquiv` data.table to group species by. This parameter should share the same name as in Biomass_borealDataPrep . PSPs are aggregated by names in the PSP column and traits estimated for the corresponding names in the `sppEquivCol` </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> useHeight </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> logical </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> FALSE </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> NA </td>
   <td style="text-align:left;"> Should height be used to calculate biomass (in addition to DBH). Advise against including height unless you are certain it is present in every PSP </td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Of these parameters, the following are particularly important:

-   **Calibration parameters**

    -   `GAMMiterations` and `GAMMknots` -- control the number of iterattions
        and smoother degree used to fit the GAMMs, respectively.

    -   `constrainGrowthCurve`, `constrainMortalityShape` and `constrainMaxANPP`
        -- determine the upper and lower boundaries of the calibrated values of
        `growthcurve`, `mortalityshape` and `maxANPP`, respectively.

-   **Data processing**

    -   `minimumPlotsPerGamm` -- define a minimum number of PSP plots needed to
        fit the GAMMs.

    -   `PSPperiod` -- PSP data period to use.

    -   `quantileAgeSubset` -- upper quantile age value used to subset PSP data.

#### Outputs

-   **Tables**

    -   `species` and `speciesEcoregion` -- tables with calibrated trait values.

    -   `speciesGAMMs` -- the fitted GAMM model objects for each species.

### Simulation flow

The general flow of *Biomass_speciesParameters* processes is:

1.  Preparation of all necessary data and input objects that do not require
    parameter fitting (e.g., the theoretical species growth curve data);

2.  Sub-setting PSP data and calculating the observed species growth curves
    using GAMMs;

3.  Finding the theoretical species growth curve that best matches the observed
    curve, for each species, within curves produced with similar longevity
    values to those in the species traits table (`species`) and with
    `growthcurve` and `mortalityshape` values within the chosen boundaries
    (`P(sim)$constrainGrowthCurve`, `P(sim)$constrainMortalityShape`);

4.  Calibrating `maxB` and `maxANPP`

5.  Adjusting `maxANPP` to match the chosen boundaries
    (`P(sim)$constrainMaxANPP`)

## Usage example

This module can be run stand-alone, but it won't do much more than calibrate
species trait values based on dummy input trait values. We provide an example of
this below, since it may be of value to run the module by itself to become
acquainted with the calibration process and explore the fitted GAMMs. However,
we remind that to run this example you will need a Google Account, and to be
granted access to the data.

A realistic usage example of this module and a few others can be found in [this
repository](https://github.com/CeresBarros/LandRBiomass_publication) and in
@BarrosEtAlinreview.

### Load `SpaDES` and other packages.


```r
if (!require(Require)) {
  install.packages("Require")
  library(Require)
}

Require(c("PredictiveEcology/SpaDES.install",
          "SpaDES", "PredictiveEcology/SpaDES.core@development"), 
        install_githubArgs = list(dependencies = TRUE))
```

### Get module, necessary packages and set up folder directories


```r
tempDir <- tempdir()
spadesModulesDirectory <- file.path(tempDir, "modules")

paths <- list(inputPath = normPath(file.path(tempDir, "inputs")), 
              cachePath = normPath(file.path(tempDir, "cache")), 
              modulePath = normPath(spadesModulesDirectory), 
              outputPath = normPath(file.path(tempDir, "outputs")))

getModule("PredictiveEcology/Biomass_speciesParameters@79896a4e3b785e34e5f509798ab6c2204bb334d7", modulePath = spadesModulesDirectory, overwrite = TRUE)

## make sure all necessary packages are installed:
makeSureAllPackagesInstalled(spadesModulesDirectory)
```

### Setup simulation


```r
library(SpaDES)

times <- list(start = 0, end = 1)

modules <- list("Biomass_speciesParameters")
inputs <- list()
outputs <- list()
objects <- list()

parameters <- list(Biomass_speciesParameters = 
                     list(GAMMiterations = 2, 
                          GAMMknots = list(
                            "Abie_bal" = 3,
                            "Abie_las" = 3,
                            "Betu_pap" = 3,
                            "Lari_lar" = 4,
                            "Pice_eng" = 4,
                            "Pice_gla" = 3,
                            "Pice_mar" = 4,
                            "Pinu_ban" = 3,
                            "Pinu_con" = 4, 
                            "Popu_tre" = 4,
                            "Pseu_men" = 3),
                          minimumPlotsPerGamm = 40,
                          constrainMortalityShape = list(
                            "Abie_bal" = c(15,25),
                            "Abie_las" = c(15,25),
                            "Betu_pap" = c(15,20),
                            "Lari_lar" = c(20,25),
                            "Pice_eng" = c(20,25),
                            "Pice_gla" = c(20,25),
                            "Pice_mar" = c(15,25),
                            "Pinu_ban" = c(15,25),
                            "Pinu_con" = c(15,25), 
                            "Popu_tre" = c(20,25),
                            "Pseu_men" = c(20,25)
                          ),
                          constrainGrowthCurve = list(
                            "Abie_bal" = c(0, 1),
                            "Abie_las" = c(0, 1),
                            "Betu_pap" = c(0, 1),
                            "Lari_lar" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pice_eng" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pice_gla" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pice_mar" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pinu_ban" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pinu_con" = c(0, 1), 
                            "Popu_tre" = c(0, 1),
                            "Pseu_men" = c(0, 1)
                          ),
                          quantileAgeSubset = list(
                            "Abie_bal" = 95, 
                            "Abie_las" = 95,
                            "Betu_pap" = 95,
                            "Lari_lar" = 95,
                            "Pice_eng" = 95,
                            "Pice_gla" = 95,
                            "Pice_mar" = 95,
                            "Pinu_ban" = 95,
                            "Pinu_con" = 99, 
                            "Popu_tre" = 99,
                            "Pseu_men" = 99
                          )
                     ))


mySim <- simInitAndSpades(times = times, 
                          params = parameters, 
                          modules = modules, 
                          paths = paths, 
                          objects = objects)

## to inspect the fitted GAMM models:
mySim$speciesGAMMs$Pice_mar
```

## References
